Regression, Pt 2

Lecture 13:

Types of Analysis

▸ Univariate

▸ Bivariate

▸ Multivariate

PSY 348

Types of Analysis

▸ Univariate: One variable, like the mean

▸ Bivariate: Two variables, like correlation

▸ Multivariate: More than 2 variables

PSY 348

Regression

▸ Regression is the multivariate version of correlation.

▸ Correlation is the bivariate version of regression.

PSY 348

Regression

▸ Regression is the multivariate version of correlation.

▸ Correlation is the bivariate version of regression.

▸ We're doing the same thing in regression as we do in correlation, BUT
there are more than 2 variables.

PSY 348

Regression terminology

In regression we will choose one variable to predict.

▸ We call this y.

▸ Y is the outcome variable.

▸ Y is the predicted variable.

PSY 348

Regression terminology

In regression we will choose two or more variables we with believe
predict y.

▸ We call these x1, x2, etc.

▸ Some people call these x and z.

▸ X is the predictor variable.

PSY 348

Regression terminology

We we predict Y with X, we say;

we regress y on the x.

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ ~~+ e~i~~~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~

~Y\ =\ mx\ +\ b~

PSY 348

Linear Regression

▸ This form of regression is called linear regression.

PSY 348

Regression: Equation Component Meanings

▸ Y = theoretical prediction of y

▸ = the actual y value for a participant

▸ b~0~ = the intercept: the average y value

▸ X~1~ = the x value for a participant

▸ b~1~ = a weighted value that is multiplied by x and added to b~0~ to
estimate y.

PSY 348

Regression Equation: More than one X

~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i\ ~+b~2~X~2i~

PSY 348

Regression: Equation Component Meanings

▸ Y = theoretical prediction of y

▸ = the actual y value for a participant

▸ b~0~ = the average y value

▸ X~1~ = the x~1~ value for a participant

▸ b~1~ = a weighted value that is multiplied by x~1~

▸ X~2~ = the x~2~ value for a participant

▸ b~2~ = a weighted value that is multiplied by x~2~

PSY 348

Regression Equation: More than one X

~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i\ ~+b~2~X~2i~

PSY 348

Interpreting coefficients

Interpreting coefficients

PSY 348

Interpreting coefficients

▸ Unstandardized b coefficient

▸ Beta coefficient

▸ t-value

▸ p-value

PSY 348

Interpreting coefficients

▸ Unstandardized b coefficient

▸ Beta coefficient

▸ t-value

▸ **p-value \<--- is this a significant predictor of y?**

PSY 348

Interpreting coefficients

▸ Unstandardized b coefficient

▸ **Beta coefficient \<--- which predictor of y has the more predictive
power?**

▸ t-value

▸ p-value

PSY 348

Interpreting coefficients

PSY 348

R\^2

R\^2

▸ R\^2 is the correlation coefficient (r) squared.

▸ R\^2 is always positive

PSY 348

R\^2

▸ R\^2 is the correlation coefficient (r) squared.

▸ R\^2 is always positive

▸ In correlation, the amount of y accounted for by x

PSY 348

R\^2

In Regression, R\^2 refers to the amount of y accounted for by all of
the x's.

PSY 348

R\^2

In Regression, R\^2 refers to the amount of y accounted for by all of
the x's.

How much of y did we account for?

PSY 348

R\^2

In Regression, R\^2 refers to the amount of y accounted for by all of
the x's.

How much of y did we account for?

Did we account for a significant amount of the variance in y?

PSY 348

R\^2

PSY 348

Interpreting R Squared

▸ R Squared

▸ Adjusted R Squared

▸ F-value

▸ p-value

PSY 348

Interpreting R Squared

▸ R Squared

▸ Adjusted R Squared

▸ F-value

▸ **p-value \<--- is this a significant predictor of y?**

PSY 348

Interpreting R Squared

▸ **R Squared \<--- The percentage of y accounted for by the
predictors**

▸ Adjusted R Squared

▸ F-value

▸ p-value

PSY 348

Interpreting R Squared

▸ R Squared

▸ **Adjusted R Squared \<--- The percentage of y accounted for by the
predictors, controlling for using too many predictors**

▸ F-value

▸ p-value

PSY 348

Example

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

(High thoughts are ideas that provide a different perspective on the
mundane facts and activities of regular life.)

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

(High thoughts are ideas that provide a different perspective on the
mundane facts and activities of regular life.) - HonestMarijuana.com

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

(High thoughts are ideas that provide a different perspective on the
mundane facts and activities of regular life.) - HonestMarijuana.com

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

(High thoughts are ideas that provide a different perspective on the
mundane facts and activities of regular life.) - HonestMarijuana.com

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

What are some predictors of high thoughts?

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

What are some predictors of high thoughts?

‣ High-making substance consumption

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

What are some predictors of high thoughts?

‣ High-making substance consumption

‣ Propensity for high thoughts at baseline

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

What are some predictors of high thoughts?

‣ High-making substance consumption

‣ Propensity for high thoughts at baseline

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

What are some predictors of high thoughts?

‣ High-making substance consumption

‣ Propensity for high thoughts at baseline

PSY 348

Linear Regression

Dr. Apriceno wants to be able to predict high thoughts.

What are some predictors of high thoughts?

‣ High-making substance consumption

‣ Propensity for high thoughts at baseline

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + b~2~X~2i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + b~2~X~2i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + b~2~X~2i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + b~2~X~2i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + b~2~X~2i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation: Theoretical

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + b~2~X~2i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + b~2~X~2i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation: Computational

Y~i~ = b~0~ + b~1~X~1i~ + b~2~X~2i~ + e~i~

PSY 348

Regression Equation: Computational

PSY 348

Linear Regression

▸ This form of regression is called linear regression.

PSY 348

Example

PSY 348

Example

PSY 348

Reporting regression findings

Example

First, report adjusted R\^2 and it's corresponding p:

▸ Our model predicted a significant amount of variance in high thoughts,
*adjusted R\^2* = 0.29, *p* \< 0.001.

▸ Age, consumption of high-making substances, and prosperity for high
thoughts predicted a significant amount of variance in high thoughts,
*adjusted R\^2* = 0.29, *p* \< 0.001.

PSY 348

Example

Then report individual betas and their p's:

▸ High-making substances consumed (beta = 0.912, p = 0.001) and
propensity for high thoughts (beta = 0.042, p = 0.04) significantly
predicted a higher high thoughts.

▸ Age did not predict likelihood of experiencing high thoughts.

▸ It's common to report betas and p's in text as well as in a table.

PSY 348

Categorical variables in regression

Categorical variables

PSY 348

Categorical variables

Categorical variables are variables that are not continuous:

‣ Groups

‣ Categories

‣ Labels

PSY 348

Categorical variables

If your only predictor is a categorical variable, you should run a
t-test or ANOVA.

PSY 348

Categorical variables in Regression

Sometimes researchers want to examine how several variables predict one
outcome.

We did this with high thoughts:

‣ Age

‣ \# of marijuanas

‣ Propensity for high thoughts

PSY 348

Categorical variables in Regression

Sometimes researchers want to examine how several variables predict one
outcome.

Sometimes one of these variables is categorical.

Example: How many episodes of a show can Dr. Apriceno watch before she
passes out on her couch?

PSY 348

Categorical variables in Regression

Dependent variable: How many episodes of a show can Dr. Apriceno watch
before she passes out on her couch?

Predictors:

PSY 348

Categorical variables in Regression

Dependent variable: How many episodes of a show can Dr. Apriceno watch
before she passes out on her couch?

Predictors:

‣ Time of night

‣ Cups of coffee consumed

‣ Is Pedro Pascal in the show?

PSY 348

Categorical variables in Regression

Dependent variable: How many episodes of a show can Dr. Apriceno watch
before she passes out on her couch?

Predictors:

‣ Time of night

‣ Cups of coffee consumed

‣ Is Pedro Pascal in the show?

PSY 348

Categorical variables in Regression

Dependent variable: How many episodes of a show can Dr. Apriceno watch
before she passes out on her couch?

Predictors:

‣ Time of night

‣ Cups of coffee consumed

‣ Is Pedro Pascal in the show?

PSY 348

Categorical variables in Regression

Dependent variable: How many episodes of a show can Dr. Apriceno watch
before she passes out on her couch?

Predictors:

‣ Time of night: As it gets later, the number of episodes will decrease
(negative correlation)

‣ Cups of coffee consumed: As cups of coffee increases, number of eps
will increase (positive correlation)

‣ Pedro:

PSY 348

Categorical variables in Regression

Dependent variable: How many episodes of a show can Dr. Apriceno watch
before she passes out on her couch?

Predictors:

‣ Time of night: As it gets later, the number of episodes will decrease
(negative correlation)

‣ Cups of coffee consumed: As cups of coffee increases, number of eps
will increase (positive correlation)

‣ Is Pedro Pascal in the show? If Pedro's in the show, number of
episodes will increase.

PSY 348

Dummy coding

‣ Assign each category a number value.

‣ 0 = no

‣ 1 = yes

PSY 348

Dummy coding

‣ Assign each category a number value.

‣ 0 = no, Pedro is not in the show.

‣ 1 = yes, Pedro is in the show.

PSY 348

Interpreting dummy coded variables

PSY 348

Report the findings

▸ Time significantly predicted the outcome variable in that as the time
got later in the evening, number of episodes decreased (beta = -0.412, p
= 0.04).

PSY 348

Interpreting dummy coded variables

PSY 348

Report the findings

▸ Time significantly predicted the outcome variable in that as the time
got later in the evening, number of episodes decreased (beta = -0.412, p
= 0.04).

▸ Coffee was not a significant predictor of number of episodes.

PSY 348

Interpreting dummy coded variables

PSY 348

Report the findings

▸ Time significantly predicted the outcome variable in that as the time
got later in the evening, number of episodes decreased (beta = -0.412, p
= 0.04).

▸ Coffee was not a significant predictor of number of episodes.

▸ Pedro Pascal being in the show significantly predicted watching more
episodes (beta = 0.912, p \< 0.001).

PSY 348

Dummy coding

PSY 348

Dummy coding

‣ Gender:

PSY 348

Dummy coding

‣ Gender:

‣ 0 = male

‣ 1 = female

PSY 348

Interpreting dummy coded variables

PSY 348

Interpreting dummy coded gender

▸ Beta is positive (beta = 0.912, p \< 0.001).

▸ Whatever is coded as 1 is higher on the the dependent variable.

PSY 348

Interpreting dummy coded gender

▸ Beta is positive (beta = 0.912, p \< 0.001).

▸ Whatever is coded as 1 is higher on the the dependent variable.

▸ Women reported significantly more enjoyment of True Crime than men.

PSY 348

Categorical variables in regression

▸ Y = How many days would you survive in the zombie apocalypse?

PSY 348

Categorical variables in regression

▸ Y = How many days would you survive in the zombie apocalypse?

▸ X1 = Crossbow skills on a scale of 1 (what's a crossbow?) to 10
(bullseye)

PSY 348

Categorical variables in regression

▸ Y = How many days would you survive in the zombie apocalypse?

▸ X1 = Crossbow skills on a scale of 1 (what's a crossbow?) to 10
(bullseye)

▸ X2 = \# of episodes of the Walking Dead watched

PSY 348

Categorical variables in regression

▸ Y = How many days would you survive in the zombie apocalypse?

▸ X1 = Crossbow skills on a scale of 1 (what's a crossbow?) to 10
(bullseye)

▸ X2 = \# of episodes of the Walking Dead watched

▸ X3 = Do you have a weapon? Y/N

PSY 348

Categorical variables in regression

▸ Crossbow skills: As crossbow skills go up, days survived will go up.

▸ WD episodes: As episodes goes up, days survived will go up.

▸ Weapon: ?

PSY 348

Categorical variables in regression

▸ Crossbow skills: As crossbow skills go up, days survived will go up.

▸ WD episodes: As episodes goes up, days survived will go up.

▸ Weapon:

▸ 0 = No weapon :(

▸ 1 = Weapon! :)

PSY 348

Categorical variables in regression

▸ Crossbow skills: As crossbow skills go up, days survived will go up.

▸ WD episodes: As episodes goes up, days survived will go up.

▸ Weapon: Individuals who have weapon will survive more days.

▸ How will we know if this is true?

PSY 348

Categorical variables in regression

▸ Crossbow skills: As crossbow skills go up, days survived will go up.

▸ WD episodes: As episodes goes up, days survived will go up.

▸ Weapon: Individuals who have weapon will survive more days.

▸ How will we know if this is true?

▸ Beta will be positive if having a weapon increases days.

▸ Beta will be negative if having a weapon decreases days.

PSY 348
