t-Tests

PSY 348: Lecture 14:

Sampling Theory

PSY 348

Sampling Theory

PSY 348

Sampling Theory

PSY 348

Sampling Theory

Setting alpha to 0.05, puts the critical value at a point where 5% of
the null distribution's area is to the right of it.

PSY 348

Probability

PSY 348

Sampling Theory

Setting alpha to 0.05, puts the critical value at a point where 5% of
the null distribution's area is to the right of it.

PSY 348

Inferential Statistics

Each inferential statistic will give us:

‣ Test statistic

‣ p-value: probability of committing a Type 1 Error \< 0.05 or 5%

PSY 348

Inferential Statistics

Each inferential statistic will give us:

‣ Test statistic

‣ p-value

‣ p \> 0.05: Fail to reject the H0

‣ p \< 0.05: Reject H0

PSY 348

Sampling Theory

Setting alpha to 0.05, puts the critical value at a point where 5% of
the null distribution's area is to the right of it.

PSY 348

T-tests

PSY 348

T-tests

▸ IV **[must be]{.underline} **nominal and have only 2 categories

▸ Using experimental versus control

▸ Any two categories (young/old)

▸ DV **[must be]{.underline}** continuous

▸ Scale of 1 to 10

▸ Count

PSY 348

Independent Samples t-test

Example: The experimental group drinks caffeinated coffee. The control
group drinks decaf. I ask both groups to complete a survey to measure
their happiness on a scale of 1 to 10.

▸ The experimental group has a mean happiness score = 8

▸ The control group mean happiness score = 6

Is the group that drank coffee significantly happier than the control
group?

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

To compare the means we need to know:

▸ Between group variance: how much the answers from the experimental
group differ from the control group.

▸ Within group variance: how much the answers of all participants differ
from one another.

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

To compare the means we need to know:

▸ Between group variance

▸ Within group variance

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

To compare the means we need to know:

▸ Between group variance

▸ Within group variance

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

To compare the means we need to know:

▸ Between group variance: how much the answers from the experimental
group differ from the control group.

▸ Within group variance: how much the answers of all participants differ
from one another.

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

Theoretical Formula:

t = (xbar - μ / √ooled s

PSY 348

Forumlas

Inferential statistics have both theoretical and computational formulas:

‣ Formula for if we actually knew the population parameters

‣ Formula for estimating the test statistics based solely on sample data

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

Theoretical Formula:

t = (xbar - μ / √ooled s

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

Theoretical Formula:

t = (xbar - μ / √ooled s

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

Theoretical Formula:

t = (xbar - μ / √ooled s

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

Theoretical Formula:

t = (xbar - μ / √ooled s

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

Computational Formula:

(Experimental M --- Control M)

√(s1 / n1) + (s2 / n2))

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

Computational Formula:

(Experimental M --- Control M)

√(s1 / n1) + (s2 / n2))

PSY 348

SPSS

The Data

▸ The main window that opens in SPSS

▸ Data view: every row is a participant

▸ Variable view: every row is a variable

PSY 348

The Data

▸ The main window that opens in SPSS

▸ Data view: every row is a participant

▸ Variable view: every row is a variable

▸ Click commands from the data file.

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

▸ Analyze

▸ Compare Means

▸ Independent Samples

PSY 348

INTERPRETTING T

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

\*If the Levene's Test is significant, use the t value from the second
row and its corresponding sig.

‣ t is the test statistic.

‣ Sig (2-tailed) is the p-value.

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test

(Experimental M --- Control M)

√(s1 / n1) + (s2 / n2))

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

We need the Levene's Test, because if the variance from the experimental
group is not equal to the variance of the control group, we have to use
a different formula for the pooled standard deviation.

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

We need the Levene's Test, because if the variance from the experimental
group is not equal to the variance of the control group, we have to use
a different formula for the pooled standard deviation.

A significant Levene's Test means a significant difference in the
variances.

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

\*If the Levene's Test is significant, use the t value from the second
row and its corresponding sig.

‣ t is the test statistic.

‣ Sig (2-tailed) is the p-value.

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: Reporting your findings

There was not a significant difference between the groups, t(18) =
1.287, p = 0.215

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: Reporting your findings

There was not a significant difference between the groups, t(18) =
1.287, p = 0.215

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: Reporting your findings

There was not a significant difference between the groups, t(18) =
1.287, p = 0.215

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: Reporting your findings

There was not a significant difference between the groups, t(18) =
1.287, p = 0.215.

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348

Independent samples t-test: SPSS

PSY 348
