Factorial ANOVA

Lecture 17

ANOVA

PSY 348

ANOVA

ANalysis

Of

VAriance

PSY 348

AnOVA

What does ANOVA do?

PSY 348

AnOVA

ANOVA compares the means of different groups to determine if they differ
significantly from one another.

PSY 348

AnOVA

ANOVA compares the means of different groups to determine if they differ
significantly from one another.

‣ ANOVA can examine independent variables with **[more than 2
groups]{.underline}**.

PSY 348

AnOVA

ANOVA compares the means of different groups to determine if they differ
significantly from one another.

‣ ANOVA can examine independent variables with **[more than 2
groups]{.underline}**.

‣ ANOVA can also look at multiple independent variables.

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: coffee and
Eric Andre. She wants to see if drinking coffee makes participants
significantly happier than not drinking coffee. She also wants to see if
watching the Eric Andre show makes them significantly happier than not
watching it.

What kind of design is she using?

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: coffee and
Eric Andre. She wants to see if drinking coffee makes participants
significantly happier than not drinking coffee. She also wants to see if
watching the Eric Andre show makes them significantly happier than not
watching it.

What kind of design is she using?

**2 x 2**

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

We can write the design of a study analyzed using ANOVA as the number of
groups/conditions in the first independent variable "x" the number of
groups/conditions in the second independent variable, etc.

**2 x 2**

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: coffee and
Eric Andre. She wants to see if drinking coffee makes participants
significantly happier than not drinking coffee. She also wants to see if
watching the Eric Andre show makes them significantly happier than not
watching it. This is a 2 x 2 design.

Number of groups in coffee: 2

Number of groups in Eric Andre: 2

DV?

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: coffee and
Eric Andre. She wants to see if drinking coffee makes participants
significantly happier than not drinking coffee. She also wants to see if
watching the Eric Andre show makes them significantly happier than not
watching it. This is a 2 x 2 design.

Number of groups in coffee: 2

Number of groups in Eric Andre: 2

DV = Happiness

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: coffee and
Eric Andre. She wants to see if drinking coffee makes participants
significantly happier than not drinking coffee. She also wants to see if
watching the Eric Andre show makes them significantly happier than not
watching it. This is a 2 x 2 design.

What are Dr. Apriceno's Alternative Hypotheses?

•

•

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: coffee and
Eric Andre. She wants to see if drinking coffee makes participants
significantly happier than not drinking coffee. She also wants to see if
watching the Eric Andre show makes them significantly happier than not
watching it. This is a 2 x 2 design.

What are Dr. Apriceno's Alternative Hypotheses?

• Participants who drink coffee will be significantly happier than those
who don't.

• Participants who watch Eric Andre will be significantly happier than
those who don't.

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: coffee and
Eric Andre. She wants to see if drinking coffee makes participants
significantly happier than not drinking coffee. She also wants to see if
watching the Eric Andre show makes them significantly happier than not
watching it. This is a 2 x 2 design.

• Participants who drink coffee will be significantly happier than those
who don't.

• Participants who watch Eric Andre will be significantly happier than
those who don't.

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: coffee and
Eric Andre. She wants to see if drinking coffee makes participants
significantly happier than not drinking coffee. She also wants to see if
watching the Eric Andre show makes them significantly happier than not
watching it. This is a 2 x 2 design.

• Participants who drink coffee will be significantly happier than those
who don't.

• Participants who watch Eric Andre will be significantly happier than
those who don't.

• Participants who drink coffee while watching the Eric Andre Show will
be the happiest.

PSY 348

anova

There are 3 types of ANOVA:

▸ Between subjects One-Way or Factorial

▸ Within subjects (repeated measures ANOVA)

▸ Mixed designs (between and within together)

PSY 348

2-way Between subjects ANOVA

▸ IVs **[must be ]{.underline}**nominal/categorical

▸ DV **[must be]{.underline}** continuous

PSY 348

2-way Between subjects ANOVA

▸ IVs **[must be ]{.underline}**nominal/categorical

▸ DV **[must be]{.underline}** continuous

PSY 348

2-way ANOVA

To compare the means, we analyzing two types of variance:

▸ Variance among all of the scores *(error variance).*

▸ Variance *between the groups of the first IV (between group variance
1).*

▸ Variance *between the groups of the second IV (between group variance
2).*

▸ *Variance between the combination of the groups (interaction
variance).*

PSY 348

2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

2-way ANOVA

To compare the means, we analyzing two types of variance:

▸ Variance among all of the scores *(within group variance).*

▸ Variance *between the groups of the first IV (between group variance
1).*

▸ Variance *between the groups of the second IV (between group variance
2).*

▸ ***Variance between the combination of the groups (interaction
variance).***

PSY 348

Calculating the Fs

Degrees of freedom

The number of observations (data points) in the data that are free to
vary when estimating a statistic.

PSY 348

Degrees of freedom

The number of observations (data points) in the data that are free to
vary when estimating a statistic.

I own 7 pairs of sock. I want to wear a different pair of socks every
day.

PSY 348

Degrees of freedom

The number of observations (data points) in the data that are free to
vary when estimating a statistic.

I own 7 pairs of sock. I want to wear a different pair of socks every
day.

PSY 348

Degrees of freedom

The number of observations (data points) in the data that are free to
vary when estimating a statistic.

I own 7 pairs of sock. I want to wear a different pair of socks every
day.

PSY 348

Degrees of freedom

The number of observations (data points) in the data that are free to
vary when estimating a statistic.

The degrees of freedom is how many times things can vary before we are
stuck with what's left over.

PSY 348

Degrees of freedom

Between Groups (**MS~BG~** ) = number of groups -- 1

Error Groups (**MS~Error~**) = number of participants -- number of
groups

Total = n -- 1

\*k is the number of groups in the independent variable.

PSY 348

Degrees of freedom

Between Groups 1 (**MS~BG1~** ) = k**~1~** -- 1

Between Groups 2 (**MS~BG2~** ) = k**~2~** -- 1

Interaction (**MS~Interaction~**i) = (k**~1~** -- 1) x (k**~2~** -- 1)

Error (**MS~Error~**) = n -- (k**~1~** x k**~2~**)

Total = n -- 1

\*k is the number of groups in each independent variable.

PSY 348

Calculating the ms in 2-way ANOVA

Between Group 1 Mean Squared: MS**~BG1~** = SS**~BG1~** / (k**~1~** --
1)

Between Group 2 Mean Squared: MS**~BG2~** = SS**~BG2~** / (k**~2~** --
1)

Interaction Mean Squared: **MS~Interaction~** =
S**S~Interaction\ /\ ~**(k**~1~** -- 1) x (k**~2~** -- 1)

Error Mean Squared: **MS~Error~** = S**S~Error\ ~**/ n -- (k**~1~** x
k**~2~**)

PSY 348

Calculating 2-way ANOVA anova

**F = MS~BG1~** / **MS~Error~**

**F = MS~BG2~** / **MS~Error~**

**F = MS~Interaction~** / **MS~Error~**

PSY 348

Interpreting f

Interpreting the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

Interpreting the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

▸ IV 1 = Gender

▸ IV 2 = Education Level

PSY 348

Interpreting the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

▸ F1 = Gender

▸ F2 = Education Level

▸ F3 = Interaction of Gender x Education Level

PSY 348

Interpreting the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

Interpreting the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

▸ F1 =

▸ F2 =

▸ F3 =

PSY 348

Interpreting the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

▸ F1 = Section

▸ F2 = Review

▸ F3 = Section x Review

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: coffee and
Eric Andre. She wants to see if drinking coffee makes participants
significantly happier than not drinking coffee. She also wants to see if
watching the Eric Andre show makes them significantly happier than not
watching it.

She randomly assigns 100 participants to coffee or no coffee x Eric
under no Eric Andre.

PSY 348

Calculating the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

Calculating the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno recruit 500 kiddos on Halloween. She assigns half to wear a
costume with a mask, and the other half to wear a costume without a
mask. She assigns participants to trick-or-treat alone or in groups.
Then she measures how much candy each child collects while
trick-or-treating.

PSY 348

Text

Calculating the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

Calculating the Fs in 2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

Calculating 2-way ANOVA anova

**F = MS~BG1~** / **MS~Error~**

**F = MS~BG2~** / **MS~Error~**

**F = MS~Interaction~** / **MS~Error~**

*\*\*All MS are divided by MS~Error.~\*\**

PSY 348

Reporting f

Reporting F

If asked to report findings in terms of the Null Hypothesis (H0), you
should report findings as:

‣ Reject H0, or

‣ Fail to Reject H0

PSY 348

Reporting F

If asked to report findings in general or for publication, you need EACH
F-vale:

‣ F(df for the between group MS, df for the error MS)

‣ = F-value

‣ Corresponding p-value

‣ \*For significant results: Means and standard deviations of each group

PSY 348

Reporting F

The group that watched the Eric Andre Show (M=8.43, s=1.02) reported
significantly more happiness compared to their peers in the control
group who watched Jeopardy (M=6.12, s=0.98), F(1,496) = 7.12, p \< 0.05.

PSY 348

Reporting F

Results IV1:

If significant: The group that watched the Eric Andre Show (M=8.43,
s=1.02) reported significantly more happiness compared to their peers in
the control group who watched Jeopardy (M=6.12, s=0.98), F (1, 496) =
7.12, p \< 0.05.

If NOT significant: There was not a significant difference in happiness
between the groups, F (1, 498) = 1.02, p = 0.07.

PSY 348

Reporting F

Results IV2:

If significant: The group that drank coffee (M=7.35, s=1.01) reported
significantly more happiness compared to their peers in the control
group who drank decaf (M=4.21, s=0.99), F (1, 496) = 9.12, p \< 0.05.

If NOT significant: There was not a significant difference in happiness
between the groups, F (1, 498) = 1.02, p = 0.07.

PSY 348

Reporting F

Results Interaction:

If significant: The group that drank coffee AND watched Eric Andre
(M=7.35, s=1.01) reported significantly more happiness compared to the
other groups (M=4.21, s=0.99), F (1, 496) = 11.14, p \< 0.05.

If NOT significant: There was not a significant difference in happiness
between the groups, F (1, 498) = 1.02, p = 0.07.

PSY 348
