Within Subjects ANOVA

Lecture 18

ANOVA

ANalysis

Of

VAriance

PSY 348

AnOVA

ANOVA, like t-tests, compares the means of different groups to determine
if they differ significantly from one another:

‣ Independent variable: Categorical / Nominal

‣ Dependent variable: Continuous

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Prof. Brocker believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: drinking
coffee and watching **Dark**. He randomly assigns 300 participants to
drink coffee or decaf. He also randomly assigns them to watch the
**Dark** or **Jeopardy**. He then measures their happiness on a scale of
1 (*not happy*) to 10 (*so very happy*).

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: drinking
coffee and watching the Eric Andre Show. She randomly assigns 300
participants to drink coffee or decaf. She also randomly assigns them to
watch the Eric Andre Show or Jeopardy. She then measures their happiness
on a scale of 1 (not happy) to 10 (so very happy).

‣ Independent variable 1:

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: drinking
coffee and watching the Eric Andre Show. She randomly assigns 300
participants to drink coffee or decaf. She also randomly assigns them to
watch the Eric Andre Show or Jeopardy. She then measures their happiness
on a scale of 1 (not happy) to 10 (so very happy).

‣ Independent variable 1: Coffee vs. Decaf

‣ Independent variable 2:

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: drinking
coffee and watching the Eric Andre Show. She randomly assigns 300
participants to drink coffee or decaf. She also randomly assigns them to
watch the Eric Andre Show or Jeopardy. She then measures their happiness
on a scale of 1 (not happy) to 10 (so very happy).

‣ Independent variable 1: Coffee vs. Decaf

‣ Independent variable 2: Eric Andre Show vs. Jeopardy

‣ Dependent variable:

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Prof. Brocker believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: drinking
coffee and watching **Dark**. He randomly assigns 300 participants to
drink coffee or decaf. He also randomly assigns them to watch the
**Dark** or **Jeopardy**. He then measures their happiness on a scale of
1 (*not happy*) to 10 (*so very happy*).

‣ Independent variable 1: Coffee vs. Decaf

‣ Independent variable 2: Dark vs. Jeopardy

‣ Dependent variable: Happiness

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Prof. Brocker believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: drinking
coffee and watching **Dark**. He randomly assigns 300 participants to
drink coffee or decaf. He also randomly assigns them to watch the
**Dark** or **Jeopardy**. He then measures their happiness on a scale of
1 (*not happy*) to 10 (*so very happy*).

PSY 348

2-way AnOVA

Prof. Brocker believes the key to happiness involves 2 things: drinking
coffee and watching **Dark**. He randomly assigns 300 participants to
drink coffee or decaf. He also randomly assigns them to watch the
**Dark** or **Jeopardy**. He then measures their happiness on a scale of
1 (*not happy*) to 10 (*so very happy*).

PSY 348

2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

2-way ANOVA

PSY 348

AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno wants to know if giving lollypops to statistics students
improves their opinion of statistics. She asks 100 students to rate how
much they enjoy statistics on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 10
(extremely). Then she gives each student a lollypop at the start of
statistics class for 2 weeks. After two weeks of conditioning, Dr.
Apriceno asks participants to rate how much they enjoy statistics again.

PSY 348

AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno wants to know if giving lollypops to statistics students
improves their opinion of statistics. She asks 100 students to rate how
much they enjoy statistics on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 10
(extremely). Then she gives each student a lollypop at the start of
statistics class for 2 weeks. After two weeks of conditioning, Dr.
Apriceno asks participants to rate how much they enjoy statistics again.

‣ Independent variable:

PSY 348

AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno wants to know if giving lollypops to statistics students
improves their opinion of statistics. She asks 100 students to rate how
much they enjoy statistics on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 10
(extremely). Then she gives each student a lollypop at the start of
statistics class for 2 weeks. After two weeks of conditioning, Dr.
Apriceno asks participants to rate how much they enjoy statistics again.

‣ Independent variable: Time (before and after)

PSY 348

Within subjects AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno wants to know if giving lollypops to statistics students
improves their opinion of statistics. She asks 100 students to rate how
much they enjoy statistics on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 10
(extremely). Then she gives each student a lollypop at the start of
statistics class for 2 weeks. After two weeks of conditioning, Dr.
Apriceno asks participants to rate how much they enjoy statistics again.

‣ Independent variable: Time (before and after)

‣ Dependent variable:

PSY 348

Within subjects AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno wants to know if giving lollypops to statistics students
improves their opinion of statistics. She asks 100 students to rate how
much they enjoy statistics on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 10
(extremely). Then she gives each student a lollypop at the start of
statistics class for 2 weeks. After two weeks of conditioning, Dr.
Apriceno asks participants to rate how much they enjoy statistics again.

‣ Independent variable: Time (before and after)

‣ Dependent variable: Enjoyment of statistics

PSY 348

AnOVA

Between subjects ANOVA compares means **[BETWEEN]{.underline}** groups
to determine if they differ significantly from one another.

Within subjects ANOVA compares pre-manipulation means to
post-manipulation means to determine if there is a difference
**[WITHIN]{.underline} **participants over time.

PSY 348

Within subjects AnOVA

Within subjects ANOVA examines differences within participants over
time.

Within subjects ANOVA is also known as Repeated Measures ANOVA, because
it looks at one measure repeated over time.

PSY 348

Within subjects AnOVA

The independent variable is time.

‣ Before intervention: baseline or pre-test

‣ After intervention: post-test

PSY 348

Within Subjects AnOVA

Within subjects ANOVA can look at 2 or more time points.

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

PSY 348

Between subjects ANOVA

In between subjects ANOVA, we analyze two types of variance:

• Between Group variance: How the data varies between the groups

• Error variance: How the data varies across all participants

PSY 348

Between subjects ANOVA

• Between Group variance: How the data varies between the groups

• Error variance: How the data varies across all participants

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

In within subjects ANOVA the variance is more complicated, because data
will differ in 3 ways:

‣ Over time: between the time points just like between the groups

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

In within subjects ANOVA the variance is more complicated, because data
will differ in 3 ways:

‣ Over time

‣ Error variance: How the data varies across all participants

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

In within subjects ANOVA the variance is more complicated, because data
will differ in 3 ways:

‣ Over time

‣ Error variance

‣ Per participant

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

In within subjects ANOVA the variance is more complicated, because data
will differ in 3 ways:

‣ Over time: Mood before the Eric Andre Show is more similar to mood
before the EAS than it is to mood after the EAS.

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

In within subjects ANOVA the variance is more complicated, because data
will differ in 3 ways:

‣ Over time: Mood before the Eric Andre Show is more similar to mood
before the EAS than it is to mood after the EAS.

‣ Error Variance: Mood will have natural variance across participants
and time.

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

In within subjects ANOVA the variance is more complicated, because data
will differ in 3 ways:

‣ Over time: Mood before the Eric Andre Show is more similar to mood
before the EAS than it is to mood after the EAS.

‣ Error Variance: Mood will have natural variance across participants.

‣ Per participant: Each participant's scores will be more like their
other scores than they are like the scores of another participant.

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA Example

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

In within subjects ANOVA the variance is more complicated, because data
will differ in 3 ways:

‣ Time

‣ Error

‣ Subjects

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

PSY 348

Calculating F

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

What is the F ratio in between subjects ANOVA?

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

What is the F ratio in between subjects ANOVA?

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

What is the F ratio in between subjects ANOVA?

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

What is the F ratio in between subjects ANOVA?

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

The F ratio in within subjects ANOVA:

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

We want measure 2 sources of variance:

▸ SS**~Time~**: this is just like the SS from between subjects ANOVA

▸ SS**~Error~**: this is harder to calculate in within subjects ANOVA,
because of the subject variance.

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

SS**~WG\ ~**= SS**~Subjects\ ~**+ SS**~Error~**

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

SS**~WG\ ~**= SS**~Subjects\ ~**+ SS**~Error~**

SS**~Error~** = SS**~WG~** - SS**~Subjects~**

PSY 348

Calculating means squared (MS)

▸ We calculate a SS for the variance between the times points
(SS**~Time~**).

▸ This is just like the SS**~BG~** from between subjects ANOVA

▸ We calculate a SS for the within group variance (SS**~WG~**).

▸ We calculate a SS for the variance by person (SS**~Subject~**).

PSY 348

Calculating means squared (MS)

▸ We calculate a SS for the variance between the times points
(SS**~Time~**).

▸ To find SS**~Error~**, we subtract SS**~Subjects~** from SS**~WG~**.

PSY 348

Calculating means squared (MS)

▸ MS**~Time~** = SS**~Time~** / df**~Time~**

▸ MS**~Error\ ~**= (SS**~WG\ ~**- SS**~Subject~**) / df**~Error~**

PSY 348

Degrees of freedom

The number of observations (data points) in the data that are free to
vary when estimating a statistic.

I own 7 hats. I want to wear a different hat every day of the week.

‣ On Sunday, I don't get a choice. On Sunday, I have to wear the Santa
hat.

‣ The degrees of freedom is how many times I get a choice before I'm
stuck with what's left over.

PSY 348

Degrees of freedom

Time (**MS~Time~**) = k -- 1

Error (**MS~Error~**) = (n -- 1) x (k - 1)

\*k is the number of time points

PSY 348

Calculating means squared (MS)

▸ MS**~Time~** = SS**~Time~** / df**~Time\ ~**MS**~Time~** =
SS**~Time~** / (k - 1)

▸ MS**~Error\ ~**= (SS**~WG\ ~**- SS**~Subject~**) /
df**~Error\ ~**MS**~Error\ ~**= (SS**~WG\ ~**- SS**~Subject~**) /
(n-1)x(k-1)**~\ ~**

PSY 348

WITHIN subjects ANOVA

The F ratio in within subjects ANOVA:

PSY 348

AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno wants to know if giving lollypops to statistics students
improves their opinion of statistics. She asks 100 students to rate how
much they enjoy statistics on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 10
(extremely). Then she gives each student a lollypop at the start of
statistics class for 2 weeks. After two weeks of conditioning, Dr.
Apriceno asks participants to rate how much they enjoy statistics again.

What's k?

What's n?

PSY 348

Practice

PSY 348

AnOVA

Dr. Grace believes watching Shameless makes Zoomers happy. She asks 50
Zoomers to rate their happiness on a scale of 1 (no happies) to 10 (all
the happies). Then she shows them an episode of Shameless. After each
Zoomer watches one episode of Shameless, she asks them to rate their
happiness again on the same scale of 1 to 10.

What's k?

What's n?

PSY 348

Practice

PSY 348

AnOVA

Dr. Apriceno measures the aging anxiety of 500 middle-aged women. She
then shows them images from anti-aging advertisements featuring young
women. After they view the images, participants report their aging
anxiety once again. Two weeks later, participants are asked to report
their aging anxiety one last time.

What's k?

What's n?

PSY 348

Practice

PSY 348

Interpreting f

Interpreting f

The MS~Time\ ~is made up of the MS~Error\ ~+ the theoretical difference
over time:

▸ MS~Time~ = *change over time* + **MS~Error~**

PSY 348

Interpreting f

The MS~Time\ ~is made up of the MS~Error\ ~+ the theoretical difference
over time:

▸ MS~Time~ = *change over time* + **MS~Error~**

▸ MS~Time~ = *0* + **MS~Error~**

PSY 348

Interpreting f

The MS~Time\ ~is made up of the MS~Error\ ~+ the theoretical difference
over time:

▸ MS~Time~ = *change over time* + **MS~Error~**

▸ MS~Time~ = *0* + **MS~Error~**

▸ MS~Time~ = **MS~Error~**

PSY 348

Interpreting f

The MS~Time\ ~is made up of the MS~Error\ ~+ the theoretical difference
over time:

▸ MS~Time~ = *change over time* + **MS~Error~**

▸ MS~Time~ = *0* + **MS~Error~**

▸ MS~Time~ = **MS~Error~**

▸ F = 1

PSY 348

Interpreting f

When F =\< 1, it's not likely to be significant.

PSY 348

Interpreting f

The MS~Time\ ~is made up of the MS~Error\ ~+ the theoretical difference
over time:

▸ MS~Time~ = *change over time* + **MS~Error~**

▸ MS~Time~ = *effect* + **MS~Error~**

▸ F \> 1

PSY 348

Hypothesis testing: ANOVA

F \< = 1 ---\> Fail to reject the Null Hypothesis

F \> 1 ---\> Refer to *p*-value ---\> Reject the Null Hypothesis

PSY 348

How many f's do Ya Get?

▸ One-way Between Subjects?

▸ Two-way Between Subjects with a 2x2 design?

▸ Within Subjects?

PSY 348

How many f's do Ya get?

▸ One-way Between Subjects? 1

▸ Two-way Between Subjectswith a 2x2 design? 3 (one for each IV and one
for the interaction)

▸ Within Subjects? 1

PSY 348

Reporting F

Reporting F

If asked to report findings in terms of the Null Hypothesis (H0), you
should report findings as:

‣ Reject H0, or

‣ Fail to Reject H0

PSY 348

Reporting F

If asked to report findings in general or for publication, you need to
report:

‣ F(df time, df error)

‣ = F-value

‣ p-value

PSY 348

Reporting F

Mood after watching the Eric Andre Show was not significantly different
from mood before watching the Eric Andre Show, *F* (1, 499) = 1.02, *p*
= 0.07.

PSY 348

Reporting F

Mood after watching the Eric Andre Show was not significantly difference
from mood before watching the Eric Andre Show, *F* (1, 499) = 1.02, *p*
= 0.07.

There was no significant change in mood over time, *F* (1, 499) = 1.02,
*p* = 0.07.

PSY 348

Reporting F

Participants' mood was significantly better after watching the Eric
Andre Show compared to before watching it, *F*(1, 499) = 7.12, *p* \<
0.05.

PSY 348

Reporting F

If asked to report findings in general or for publication, you need to
report:

‣ F(df time, df error)

‣ = F-value

‣ p-value

\*\*If the results are significant, we have to also report the means and
standard deviations for each time point.\*\*

PSY 348

Reporting F

Participants' anxiety differed significant across time, *F*(2, 198) =
3.744, p = 0.25. Anxiety was highest at pre-test (M= 19.58, s = 0.643).
Anxiety was lowest at baseline (M , s ). Anxiety at post test was M= ,
s.

PSY 348

Practice

▸ Open Ihno's dataset in SPSS

PSY 348

Practice

▸ Open Ihno's dataset in SPSS

▸ Was anxiety just before the Stats Exam significantly higher than
baseline anxiety?

PSY 348
